session 79 the song of the cell
Siddharth Mukherjee in conversation with
Willian Dalrymple
Siddharth Mukherjee is a famed
oncologist biologist and celebrated
Pulitzer prize-winning author his most
recent book the song of the cell
examines the basic autonomous unit that
makes up all organisms
steeped in scientific research and
visual metaphors of cell systems
mukherjee's words create a lucid and
Vivid picture of the discovery of cells
and our understanding of them
in conversation with festival
co-director and historian William
Dalrymple Mukherjee presents a panoramic
Saga that combines Memoir history and
science as it attempts to answer the
questions of what it means to be alive
Siddharth Mukherjee is a pioneering
physician oncologist and author who has
redefined a public discourse on human
health medicine and science
a profoundly influential voice in the
scientific Community his emperor of all
maladies a biography of cancer earned
him the 211 2011 Pulitzer Prize his
latest book the song of the cell has
been named a New York Times notable book
of 2022.
William Tower limpel is the author of
Wilson prize-winning white Mogul stuff
Cooper prize-winning the last Mughal and
the Hemingway and kapuscisky
prize-winning return of a king
his book The Anarchy was shortlisted for
the Duke of Wellington medal the Tata
book of the year and the historical
writers association award and won the
2020 Arthur Ross medal from the U.S
Council of foreign relations
he has been awarded five honorary
doctorates is a fellow of the Royal
Society of literature the Royal Asiatic
society and the Royal Society of
Edinburgh and has held visiting
lectureships at Princeton Brown and
Oxford where he's currently an honorary
bodilian fellow
he was presented with a precedence medal
by the British Academy and was named one
of the world's 50 thinkers for 2020 by
Prospect magazine
he's a founder and co-director of Jaipur
literature Festival
ladies and Gentlemen please join me in
welcoming Siddharth Mukherjee and
William darrenberg
[Applause]
one bit of my biography that was left
out in that was the fact I failed my
biology O level
so the Natural Choice to uh talk to my
old friend sadata but he kindly and
flatteringly asked me to do this so
forgive any uh scientific and uh
biological uh nonsense that you hear
from me over the next hour
it is particularly daunting to talk
biology at whatever level with one of
the most remarkable people of my entire
generation
what you heard read out in that
extraordinary biography of sadata was
just one side of his life which is his
writing life what was not mentioned is
that as well as this extraordinary
successful non-fiction career which is
you know by far he is by far the most
successful non-fiction writing Indian in
history uh there is a very very strong
um
fiction tradition in this country but
surprisingly few people from here win
the big prizes of non-fiction and sadata
has won them all but that is just one
aspect of his biography he's also a
practicing Doctor Who heals people on a
regular basis from the horrible disease
of cancer he also runs one of the
leading cancer research Labs the
Mukherjee lab which is patenting and
pioneering new cures for cancer on a on
a separate basis and on top of all that
he's a spectacular musician and has
toured with his band The jog blues and
sang drupad and hindustani vocals in
some of the great concert tours of the
world
so this is no uncommon mind that we are
grappling with here it's all made up
we should also say the other the
funniest thing about Serato at the end
of all that it's his wife that got the
MacArthur genius Fellowship
that wasn't made up and
um the couple were named recently by
Vogue as the most brilliant couple in
town the town being New York and they
are an extraordinary double Act
but this new book is the third book of
sadata's which deals with
first up with cancer the second with
genes and the third with the cell and in
the sense they form a Trilogy
um very much tackling the areas that
you've dealt with as a practitioner of
medicine and as a researcher but the
astonishing thing about this writing is
that dealing with very complex science
he writes with such Grace
and narrative flow with metaphors so
beautiful that even a scientific
such as myself can understand get
interested and begin to comprehend the
complex science which he is describing
it's a spectacular mixture of science
A History of Science and History of
scientists and a notebook in a sense of
a practitioner dealing with the business
that he's writing about and as anyone in
this audience that ever wants to learn
how to write non-fiction about any
complex subjects
could learn the art from this book
forget going on writers courses just
read a book by sadata Mukherjee and
you'll be well on your uh on your way to
understanding how this is done
to get straight to the business of cells
you use the phrase here a life within a
life an independent living being a unit
that forms part of the whole a living
building block contained in a larger
living being what do you exactly mean by
that
so um first of all thank you for having
me here
um
um to answer the question I I I suppose
I should give you a little bit of the
Genesis of the book and and why this
book and and uh why this book for for
everyone
um why this book for a historian why
this book for
um anyone else
um
the uh the back story of all of this
goes back to an idea that I've been
toggling with for a while which is the
idea of the universality of laws in in
the Sciences in the social sciences and
and other disciplines in history
Etc
um
and there was a there's a feeling among
biologists that were sort of the third
degree of science
um physics being sort of a little bit
ahead of us chemistry being a little bit
ahead of us and and we're the people who
bring the physicists their coffee
um and um because they're full of laws
um but it turns out that in fact
if you look at the world of the living
The Living World
um there are three extraordinarily
universal laws that sweep through the
living world
um the first is the theory or law if you
want to call it of evolution and in fact
you can use Evolution now not only to
understand biology you can use Evolution
to understand social sciences economics
potentially even history
um there's something about this idea of
evolution that really sort of strikes
you and there are a thousand books on it
the many I would recommend
um and and of course you know they've
really kind of converted this uh this
field into into popular literature
um the second is the universality of
genetics the genetics law the laws of
genetics and again there are a thousand
books on genetics
um including my own book The Gene and
intimate history the Third
just as important is the universality of
of cell theory
that all living beings and we'll come
back to this over and over again that
that first of all all living beings are
made of cells
and that all diseases vegetables and
animals yeah vegetables animals
um are made of cells and
um and that all cell all illness all
pathology is ultimately cellular
pathology
very powerful sweeping statement about
all living beings now unlike the first
two Evolution and
um and genetics
cells I thought had been a little bit
gypped
um there wasn't a book
um and it's again similar to the emperor
maladies there wasn't a book about
cancer so someone had to write it
um there wasn't and so you know there's
certainly some books about cell biology
and cell theory but there really isn't a
way that you can bring people into this
spectacular revolution of the
understanding of the human body of
illness of Wellness of normalcy
Etc you know and and all its Dimensions
um and that's why you know I began to
sort of explore this and that's why this
idea of you know what is a cell a cell
is the least
um autonomous unit of life
and most people I would imagine in the
audience know what that that is but
there are understanding sort of stops
there
but there's so much more and so much
more that we've learned uh in the in the
in the ensuing decades since that
Discovery and that's that's sort of the
that's sort of the beginning of the book
and the title the song of the cell this
is one that runs through the book you
keep coming back to this obviously
you're a musician and this is language
that comes to you but explain what you
mean by that yeah so there are two songs
I mean the title of this book came very
late
um in the Genesis of the book I mean I
don't know how you title your books uh
really but um I tend to title my books
right at the end I I sort of come to
them right at the end
um and they're really two songs I think
that the book refers to the first song
and it's a it's a very important idea
again is that again you know we come
back to this idea of genes there's been
so much written and talked about genes
and genetics
um importantly
um but what's interesting is that the
gene is a molecule is encoded in a
molecule in DNA and it's lifeless
without a cell
it's the cell that brings it to life
just like a musician brings a score to
life
um this analogy remains throughout the
book
um the cells in your neurons and the
cells in in your immune system the cells
that you know
um run the various parts of your body
they all inherit the same genome and yet
like a musician or a symphony or to take
an analogy from Indian music if you
present the same rug to different uh
individuals they'll sing out a
completely different song even though
the structural element of that song is
the same and so that's the first idea
that sort of that's the first song of
the cell
but then I was while I was reading this
book I was inspired by um I was reading
also um amitab gosh's book the nutmeg's
curse and he has this lovely passage in
it uh in which he describes
um a very eminent botanist who goes into
um the forest into the rainforest with a
young man and the young man says you
know I can name all the individual
plants in this Forest but I can't tell
the songs that run between them
and so there's a second kind of song
that this that sells I think sing to
each other and that's a song that we
don't know yet and I'll just give you
one example
um it's a very provocative example
um
the the English surgeons Steve Stephen
Padgett
um in the late 1800s ask the question
if the liver and the spleen are two
organs that sit next to each other so
it's fascinating yeah yeah I love this
example so if the liver and the spleen
are two organs that sit next to each
other and they're about the same size
and this is about the same flow of blood
through them why is it that the liver is
one of the most frequent sites of cancer
metastases while the spleen is almost
never a cytos cancer metastases I mean
as a Scotsman is this not related to
Whiskey intake also or
I wish it was but um
the amazing thing is we don't know the
answer to that question so there is two
vessels immediately next to each other
exactly geographically in the body same
blood flow same sort of size totally
different reactions totally different
reactions so in some ways they're
singing out different cells if you want
to call it cancer cells in this case are
seeing out completely different songs to
those two different environments and so
the second use of the song of the cell
and you say that in the sense we
beginning to understand the cell itself
but you don't understand how cells
relate to each other that's right and
that's the second use of the word song I
mean this is relationship yes this uh
interrelationship between cells so we've
been talking in a sense in in
theoretical terms your book is full of
individual case studies and real human
beings and when we were talking just
before coming on stage you mentioned a
child in Bangalore do you want to just
mention that very moving case you told
me about it yes we were just talking
about
um and it's a case about the the uh the
magic of numbers now I I don't believe
in in sort of cosmic phenomena but
sometimes sometimes I I take a step back
and think about it twice
um so we're in the middle of
um and by saying we
um
a group of us um brought were the first
to bring T-cell therapies to India as
treatments for cancer not available in
India before we um are running the first
phase two B study of using weaponized T
cells against cancer
very uh weaponized T-cells do you want
to just yeah let me describe that so you
you take T cells are are very powerful
immune cells they usually recognize
viruses and bacteria in the body but you
can genetically engineer them to
recognize cancer and when you do that
you can take cancers that have relapsed
and become refractory to chemotherapy
and then make you can cure patients
right to the beginning of the book you
talk about your friend who had a
melanoma on his face that's right and
and you said that the the cancer the
body couldn't recognize
the threat from that correct element but
you can override that
um invisibility cloak of a cancer
um and uh using genetic engineering and
and let the bodies see it for the first
time and let the body see for the first
time and and it's and the second example
I given the book is Emily Whitehead in
in her case of course that was exactly
what's done she is now she was seven
when she had that therapy
um with relapse refractory uh acute
lymphoblastic leukemia a disease that
used to carry 100 mortality she just
celebrated her 18th birthday
um so a complete complete miraculous
transformation
um extraordinarily difficult and I often
say it's like sending a rocket to the
moon so about three years ago four years
ago
um a group of US currency
said well this we should make this
therapy available in India we can send
Rockets to the Moon we can certainly
make T cells and genetically engineer
them so it was a mad project we set it
off in Bangalore and
the second patient or third patient I
flew down from the United States to
treat this patient so I go down to the
room
in Bangalore and I'm opening this this T
Cell infusion I mean you know well I
have to tell you you have to build an
ecosystem that is so complex in order to
deliver this therapy and it ends up in a
little bag which looks like you know a
bag of saline but nonetheless so I
opened the step I I talked to this kid
and I say what's your name and
um he says his name and he says a name
I'm not I'm not going to tell you his
name but uh but I instantly recognize
that it's a Bengali name we're sitting
in Bangalore and I say to him well what
what do your parents do and his mom is
there
and he says my father is a guard in a
hotel
and I said which hotel
and he says well he's the security guard
on this one particular floor
of the one hotel that I happen to stay
in every year in Kolkata
okay
so already I'm a little bit surprised so
um two years pass and I'm back last week
in Kolkata
at the same Hotel
and my flight lands I'm bleary-eyed and
like it's 2 A.M in the morning and it's
hard for me to say this without sort of
falling apart a little bit but
that the father is waiting there for me
on your flow of your hotel on outside
the door of my hotel
2 A.M in the morning he says I saw your
name on the roster and I was waiting for
you
um and I said well what's with what's
what's with the child and he says oh my
child is alive
his life has been saved he you know he's
been living in kokola two years gone by
so I said well bring him for breakfast
tomorrow
and so I met with the child I showed you
the photographs of course I'm not gonna
it's it's private information
but I sometimes think to myself you know
what
you know as I said I don't have Cosmic
beliefs there are 1.3 billion people in
India
of whom 0.1 percent
are kids with relapsed refractory
acute lymphoblastic leukemia of whom 0.1
percent are children of security guards
of whom 0.1 percent are children of
security guards who happen to be in the
same floor of the place in Kolkata that
I have to happen to go to of whom 0.1
percent are alive
it's a story that will go down in some
kind of Canon of History somewhere and
someone else would write it
one of the things I loved about the book
is in the sense it's a completely
enormous subject and your book in many
ways is a sort of comprehensive guide to
basic biology but it's also tiny
dealing with these tiny tiny objects
these tiny tiny cells
talk to me about about one of the things
do very well in the book is the history
of science tell me about Robert Hook
17th century looking down a microscope
what does he see
so Robert hooke's a funny character he's
a bizarre a bizarre character I love
these uh these um eccentric
um characters so Robert Hook
um is the first person who coins the
word cell
um from the from the from the idea that
they look like sort of jail cells he
looks down a microscope Now hook is um
he comes to Oxford again small world
bizarre world um when I was at Oxford I
lived in what used to be Hook's old
house the house that I that hook did all
his experiments in but anyway so hook
um is a student at Oxford
um and he begins to look down a
microscope um what's astonishing about
Hook is he is an incredible polymath
he's an architect he is a writer he's a
scientific illustrator he's a microscopy
he's a biologist he lives through the
Civil War and all this yes yes and he
rebuilt much of the um much of London
post the uh post the great fire he was
one of the uh he was the main consultant
or one of the main Consultants to to
Christopher Wren
um so hook um he's also a very
unpleasant character by the way um he
has a nasty fight with Newton um and the
legend goes that um it's so nasty that
when so hook becomes the president of
the of the Royal Society and when the
the offices of the Royal Society move
um and the Newton becomes a new
president Newton is so irritated with
hook that there's one portrait of Robert
Hook in history and and the legend goes
or The Story Goes that Newton neglects
to move it with him and it's forever
lost we actually don't know what he
looks like we don't know what Robert
hooks looks like so anyway but Robert
hooks does look down the microscope and
he finds these um these uh these bodies
inside bodies and that's the that's the
origin of the cell and you also
introduce this to this character Rudolph
verchow yes uh mid 19th century who is
the first to recognize that cancer is
cells behaving in a rogue Manner and no
matter how we Twist and Turn we shall
eventually come back to the cells yeah
so so cancer is one of the Rudolph
workhouse
very important contributions but rule of
workhouse actually a very seminal person
in this book in fact in the in in in the
Prelude or the prologue to the book I
talk about how I almost dedicated this
book to Rudolph workout
um he is
um a a a man who Champions Liberty he's
a you know he um he um he's a scientist
but he's also a social reformer
um he plays a very important role in um
resisting the forces of anti-Semitism
that are sweeping through Germany
um in the um in the early 20th century
but aside from that uh he's of course a
very important scientist and the reason
he anchors this book is because of of
two things
um two very Central ideas that he brings
into the world of biology and perhaps
into the world of Sciences and then
interestingly they're just sort of Yin
and Yang the the first idea is that
um that all normal physiology you know
people used to wonder about how how do
human beings behave why are we made up
the way we are made up how do muscles
contract how do we you know this idea of
human of the human body as a machine
and workout makes the very radical claim
that yes you can think about the human
body as a machine but the sub parts of
the machine are cells so in other words
all physiology is a consequence of
cellular physiology
again this idea seems to be a little
banal sometimes but but let me make it
exciting to you right so think about
think about its its applications where
things might get really fuzzy think
about for instance I I've spoken about
this in a piece in the guardian think
about mental illness
right think about depression
schizophrenia
and if you think about mental illness
depression being one of them and you
think about virkau saying that all
physiology is the consequence of
cellular physiology and its Yang
statement all pathology all illness is
the consequence of cellular pathology
that cells going wrong all of a sudden
you start looking at the human body at
illness in a completely different way
yeah
um you think about mental illness and
information it's a cellular illness that
can be psychosocial elements to it there
could be whatever elements to it but all
of a sudden it's somatized it becomes
part of your body and there's an
enormous power to that you can begin a
whole line of Investigation
um it's a it's a it can destigmatize
that somatization can destigmatize many
things you know you know you don't say
slap yourself out of cancer
and by that same logic you don't say
slap yourself out of depression yeah
exactly so so very important figure in
this uh in this story on this same stage
just before lunch we had Merlin
sheldrake talking about fungi and again
you had the sensation of of
um individual cells doing their own
thing but forming a hole and talking to
each other and huge structures within
the fungal World communicating with that
when you think take that thought and and
then relate to a human being I mean are
we are we the ones in charge is are we
running the show or are the cells
running it and occasionally doing their
own thing like cancer and we just have
to you know go with it or not
well you're asking kind of um I think
several questions in that question I
mean you're asking a question about
autonomy agency and then moving on to
questions about sanctions and and and
um potentially about about Consciousness
but
but I mean what we know so far is that
sells almost certainly have autonomy but
it's pretty much no doubt about that
they do their own thing they do their
own thing yeah they're and you can
imagine them as Nano machines in our
body and US built out of those Nano
machines
um the good thing for the most part is
that they they have a reason to
cooperate with each other
um otherwise you and I wouldn't exist we
would float away and become individual
cells and disintegrate and become
individual bacteria fungi whatever it
might be
um so yes they have autonomy
um to some extent they have agency in
the sense that they do things
um they do things for a purpose that's
in Excel it's an extraordinary thought
that's how cells have agency exactly and
then you come to sort of
um things that go beyond agency I mean
are they conscious most biologists would
say no
um but interestingly groups of cells
um when they cooperate and interact with
each other for instance in your brain
they have the emergent property of the
of allowing things like Consciousness to
exist so why is it in a cell's interest
to go Rogue and do cancer
well it's it's
not it sense that I mean cancer is an
evolutionary disease
um and what's what's what's important
about thinking about cancer killing
they're killing their host what's
important about cancer is that
um you know if they killed hosts too
quickly
um if there were genes that killed hosts
all all too quickly then in fact the
disease would vanish
what's important about cancer you know
at a genetic or cellular level is that
it parasitizes or Alters the very genes
that are responsible for normal cellular
Behavior that's the reason cancer exists
in the first place so again to think of
on a fungal parallel those those fungi
that infect ants and make them go to the
top of a piece of grass and then Sprout
out to uh uh
fruiting branch is that what cancer
cells are doing that they're not killing
us immediately but they're deliberately
leading us on a dance well again I mean
it's very difficult to use language
which has intention in all of this right
and one has to be very careful about
using intentionality cancer doesn't have
intentionality it is an evolutionary
consequence of cellular behavior and
it's an evolutionary consequence of
cellular Behavior because cells are
designed to survive cells are designed
to reproduce cells are designed to grow
cancer is parasitizing or using all of
those
properties those characteristics but it
doesn't have intentionality it's not in
it doesn't have any intentionality it's
just an evolutionary consequence in the
same way I would argue and maybe Martin
can can come in on this but in the same
way that you know fungi don't have
intentionality in making an ant go up an
ant show but it's an evolutionary
consequence of their of the fact that if
they do so the fungi that happened to do
so happened to be naturally selected to
survive and they spread yeah and it's
very important to use this language and
I I try many many times in my book to
re-insert this language it's important
to use this language not only in biology
but also in medicine and in the social
sciences in political sciences in
history is to use is to get away
sometimes from the language of agency
and intentionality because as soon as
you get into the language of
intentionality then the victim is to
blame right you caused your cancer
you are responsible and and so forth and
that gets into sort of the human the
natural human tendency towards the
intentional ideas it's just important to
be careful about that and think about
cancer as an evolutionary consequence of
cellular Behavior but with your work you
could modify yourself
yes absolutely I mean we've learned
lately to do this it wasn't possible 50
years ago or 100 years ago but um we've
learned to do this and by by that
my own laboratory has learned to do this
several others have
um but we've learned to do it slowly
it's taken us a lot of time we've uh you
know and and and met with um very
appropriate degree of of skepticism and
resistance but over the years over the
last five or seven years we've shown
pretty much
that you can modify cells and even
potentially stem cells you can modify
them safely you can genetically modify
them change their properties and use
them therapeutically as we've done with
that kid who's still living in in and
playing Cricket the last I saw him in in
Kolkata but and you can also weaponize
you can weapon I mean that is one of the
ways you can modify it you can recognize
explain that that's such an interesting
idea well so you know generally speaking
again to return to the language The
evolutionary language we were talking
about one of the consequences one of the
reasons that cancers can even grow in
the first place is that they become they
make themselves again in an evolutionary
way to keep away from the language of
intentionality they make themselves they
adapt and survive and become invisible
to the immune system
um we know this because there are some
they're very rare cases well documented
in in literature of cancers that are
unable to make themselves invisible to
the immune system and they're
spontaneously eliminated
um in fact if you look in the human body
if you look at autopsies
um in humans
um you'll find all sorts of abnormal
cells cancer cells beginning to to
happen
um there's a study fascinating study if
you look in the thyroid for instance
um in autopsy series
80 to 90 percent of people
um who have died of other causes natural
causes will have what would seem like
malignant cells in their thyroid
70 or some very large number will have
malignant cells in their breast women
will have they've died of other causes
so somehow or the other the cancers have
been born but they haven't taken root
and we don't know exactly why but one of
the reasons why
there are several reasons but in one and
understanding the self again understand
the song of the cell exactly but one of
the reasons is that there is a
phenomenon of immune surveillance the
immune system is not only looking for
cells that have been infected by viruses
but it's also looking for potentially
malignant cells including cancer cells
um so when you say you weaponize
um a cell against cancer what you're
really trying to do is to make the
cancer visible again to the immune
system where it had previously become
invisible and you can use genetic very
powerful tools of genetic engineering
including modifications of genes to now
make the to coin a word to make the
previously invisible cancer the cloaked
cancer revisible to the immune system
that's what I mean by weaponization but
some cells you find intractable there's
a kind of mystery of some that just
won't crack open that's right so we
talked a little bit about
um I'm sure this has happened to I mean
there's everyone here some cells are
intractable you cannot make them you
cannot make at least yet
um and I always say at least yet because
10 years ago who would have thought that
we could do this for leukemias and
Lymphoma lymphomas and myelomas but here
we are you know 10 years from there so I
say yet but you know some have become
have proved to be extraordinarily
intractable to making re-visible
pancreatic cancer and some other cancers
um some forms of breast cancer triple
negative breast cancer for instance very
very tough tough puzzles to crack um so
far do you ever find yourself coming up
against ethical issues such as you we're
now talking about modifying cells is
that changing what we are
as human beings is this thing you
mentioned I'm early on in your book
about one of the uh genius scientists
who's in jail because he's crossed
ethical lines on on modifying uh humans
absolutely so um in fact he just came
out of jail uh last week but um uh dear
friend uh no he's not a friend
I was not involved in getting him into
jail or getting him out of jail
um I suggest we keep we keep out of
jailing or non or or getting people out
of people out of jail but anyway but um
I think
I mean as we sort of come towards the
end of this conversation
um perhaps I can propose
um what I call an ethical triangle and
I'm going to propose this because this
ethical triangle as we modify genes
modify cells modify humans becomes a
triangle that's not really within the
purview of medicine or biology but it
becomes your problem because the
stewardship of human beings is not my
problem or your problem or it's it's a
common it's a shared problem we are on
the edge and again I'm going to repeat
this very carefully we are on the edge
of
really questioning the level of
stewardship we have of Our Own
selves
science is moving faster than you can
possibly imagine
um but in general in this world is a
good thing in the Cure is it possible
that we're impossible 10 years ago on
one hand it's a good thing but raises I
would I I would suggest a profoundly
important ethical questions about how we
maintain this stewardship and and who
the stewards are and what their role is
so
um
what I've proposed is what I call a
triangle of stewardship
um and I want people to think about this
because this is not a scientific issue
this is a it's a very fundamental issue
about who we are and what we will become
I mean the triangle of stewardship
begins
um the top edge of the triangle is is
suffering
so
the
um the North Star
that I believe as a physician and
scientist as a human being the North
Star to which we should Peg any attempts
to modify ourselves to create new humans
is to emancipate suffering
it's opposite of course being any form
of augmentation any form of changing
human beings to enhance qualities that
we don't have or we might desire to have
so there has to be an element of
suffering involved that itself is a gray
area so just to give you some examples I
mean before IVF was was invented in
vitro fertilization was invented lots of
people thought that infertility was not
a form of suffering and you could make
that argument today for some people
infertility is not a form of suffering
but for some people it is so that itself
is changing so we need to have a
conversation a dynamic conversation over
what suffering is but nonetheless let me
Peg one of edge of the triangle to
suffering especially to extraordinary
suffering
the second edge of the triangle is what
I call the edge of scientific
determinism which is to what extent are
we sure that we can perform these
changes safely
um to what extent are we sure that these
changes will indeed affect the the the
the correct
um modification and not create some kind
of you know if you want to use
literature some kind of frankenstinian
moment in in in in human history
um that's that's that's somewhat of a
scientific challenge the third edge of
this triangle I think is is the most is
is the one that we have the most
stewardship of and that's the humanistic
Edge
um so medical scientific and and the
humanistic Edge and that has to do with
um informed consent
um understanding
um uh lack of so Freedom Choice
Liberties lack of State mandates lack of
coercion and a full and deep
understanding of what it means to to to
enter the sphere now when we operate
within the realm of this ethical
triangle which I've now proposed in two
books I think we remain in a relatively
safe area it's when we depart from this
triangle
um when we depart from the north star of
suffering when we depart from informed
consent
um uh when we depart from what is known
and Unknown about about the scientific
challenges that's when we run into
problems
so that this is a literary Festival one
of the things leaving aside the science
that astonishes me about these books are
there's all three of these extraordinary
books is is how you construct
extraordinary readable accessible books
from very intractable material I
sometimes worry about how to make 18th
century politics uh presentable to
people that don't know it but this is
much much more complex stuff and much
more in excessive at least it's not yeah
um so talk about your process how do you
start putting these books together a lot
of the stuff begins with New Yorker
articles it seems to be yes so um The
New Yorker is a great um sort of
starting place for me because I haven't
incredible editors incredible editors
there but um you know William I mean I I
know you know this as a non-fiction
writer I mean a lot of writing and this
is true for all writing including
fiction begins with questions that are
not present in the book
um questions about the question that I
ask myself is what's the mood of this
book going to be like
and that's a very dreamy question it's a
question that lives in sort of
um things that you cannot Arctic it's in
articulate in an article question what's
the structure of this book going to be
like what's it going to look like as a
skeleton um this book was particularly
hard to write because the first book in
which
um you know there's an old old saying in
both fiction and non-fiction writing is
make chronology your friend make time
your friend because it'll it'll tell you
how to write a book you begin at the
beginning you end at the end
um so I do it that's right
this book is particularly hard to write
because this is not a chronological book
this in fact if you think about it
structurally if you think about it in
terms of the structure of this book is a
book in which you know it's a series of
linked short stories
um so I tried very hard to sort of
straight jacket this book into
chronology but it wouldn't work and so
this book is a link it's a set of linked
short stories every chapter is a cell it
takes on a cell and becomes the full
short story of the cell there is the you
know the the cells in your brain which
is the chapter is called the
contemplating and how do you get these
cells to relate to each other and then
the last few chapters are about sort of
knitting it all together
um the epilogue which is a long epilogue
but five chapters of epilogue are about
knitting these together and trying to
figure out the song of the cell
ladies and gentlemen we have five more
minutes I'm going to ask you a question
you've got a choice
would you like to ask questions or would
you like Siddharth to read an
extraordinarily beautiful passage from
his books those that would like to ask
questions put their hands up
those that would like a reading put
their hand up the reading wins okay all
right um
well so
I mean part of this part of this is also
you know my books are unusual I think to
write for me
um because I string together
um both Memoir
um deep history philosophy often Indian
philosophy sometimes music
um poetry even some mythology and
mythology exactly
um and I I sort of it uh you know
um in Kolkata I said you know bengalis
have this dish
um called chachori
um which is uh notoriously difficult to
make
because it's a melange
um so so these books you can think about
my attempts to make a literate literary
version of this so this is from the
Memoir portion of the book
um which I'm going to read it's going to
be a four minute reading
so this is me
um back at Oxford when I'm sort of
beginning to learn about cells and and
learn about
um about what happens Alan Townsend's
lab
sat atop a steep hill at The Institute
for molecular medicine at the edge of
Oxford University
in the fall of 93 when I arrived at
Oxford to study it with Alan as a
graduate student in Immunology
the mysteries of T-cell function were
still being deciphered
The Institute was a modernist steel and
glass building
the security guard at the front desk a
woman with a thick Welsh accent which
you could probably do
checked IDs before letting you in
without the right card she would refuse
to let you enter
two years passed with me fumbling
through my pocket for the card until I
finally got the courage to confront her
I had been there every day for 24
straight months didn't she recognize me
by my face
she looked at me stonly I'm just doing
my job
her job I suppose was to detect
Intruders
as if I might well have been James Bond
who'd driven up the hill in an Aston
Martin
on a top secret mission to feed my
T-cell cultures at night
in retrospect I've grown to appreciate
her diligence she had internalized
immunity
I'm going to skip forward a little bit
an Italian postdoc Vincenzo chirundulo
was my direct mentor
Enzo was short garrulous and
effervescent and yet during my first
weeks in the lab he ignored me entirely
he rushed around the lab navigating his
way past me as if I was some irritating
piece of lab equipment that someone had
offloaded in the wrong place
he was finishing a research paper and
teaching a freshly arrived graduate
student the details of Immunology seemed
hardly worth his time
one aspect of Enzo's project involved
manufacturing viruses to infect Mouse in
human cells
to expand the virus that is to make more
viral particles so that he could do this
experiment you had to infect a layer of
cells and then you extracted the virus
by placing the whole culture in a tube
and freezing and throwing it exactly
three times
it was a procedure that acquired
precision and patience
without freeze throwing you couldn't
release enough but if you overdid the
process you might kill the virus
entirely in the entire experiment would
go to waste
one morning soon after I arrived I found
Enzo fussing over one such tube
a research technician also Italian had
made a prep
but she had left for a vacation Enzo had
no idea whether the virus had been
extracted or whether the tube had been
left without the process it was a tense
moment
a low viral count and the whole
experiment critical to the paper would
go down the drain
he cussed under his breath in Italian
Cavallo by the way I was in Kolkata and
someone came and asked me well what
other cuss words do you know in Italian
and I told him several others anyway
I asked Enzo if I could look at the tube
and he handed it to me and on its bottom
in barely visible ink I saw that the
technician had scribbled the letters c s
c s c s
what's the word for freeze in Italian I
asked him
conjulari Enzo replied and for thought
so that's what the technician had
written I I thought freeze thaw freeze
Thor freeze thought except in a kind of
Morse code cs cscs three times each
Enzo regarded me sharply perhaps I
wasn't a waste of time after all he
finished his experiment and asked me if
I wanted a coffee and he made two cups
something had thought between us
we'll move a little bit ahead
in early 2019 I learned that Enzo had
been diagnosed with Advanced lung cancer
the news of his illness numbed me with
shock
I couldn't bring myself to call him for
days
a weak past perhaps too until I finally
dialed his number from New York he
picked up immediately
he was matter of fact about his
condition
perhaps those T cells whose inner
Mysteries he had spent his life
uncovering would find a way to fight his
cancer
as Alan Townsend my mentor wrote about
Enzo in the in a journal one hears the
phrase fight with cancer but this
description is a pale shadow of the
intense personal grinding immunological
battle he waged with the rebellious
cells that challenged him
he did this unperturbed never missing a
seminar always available to students and
colleagues it was a demonstration of
supreme courage
in 2020 a few weeks before I was about
to visit Oxford to give a talk
I found out that Enzo had died
I canceled my trip
that evening I sat in the lab silently
recalling my mentor my friend
holding back the memories until they had
hardened
I felt dazed and then desiccated
congealed in Gloom
it was only then hours later that the
grief burst in me in wave upon liquid
wave
Enzo it's conjulari
thank you ladies and gentlemen
will be signing books in the tent
afterwards I highly recommend you go by
his book all three of them
would like to thank Siddharth Mukherjee
and William darling Paul for this
wonderful enlightening session
a huge round of applause for Siddharth
Mukherjee and William Tower Temple
please grab your copies from Full Circle
he'll be available for signing books at
the book signing decks on my right hand
side please
there it is
[Music]